6

DOMINANT FIRM UNILATERAL
CONDUCT: MONOPOLIZATION AND
ABUSE OF DOMINANCE

‘The European Commission concluded in 2017 that Google had ining
Agreement on the European Economic Area (“EEA Agreement") when
Deeg its own centers service more favorably than
‘competing comparison-shopping services on its general search resul
It found that Google held a dominant pa wd wae oe a
sett 4 firm from abusing its dominant position, and chat it abused its
lontinant position in thirteen separate national markets by directing online
traffic toward its own comparizon-shopping service pages | from
competing comparison-shopping services.' It did not engage in extensive ec=
onomic analysis of the effects of the conduct on consumers.

In contrast, the pale Sate ‘Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit did
‘engage in economic analysis when it concluded that Microsoft, the leadi
provider of intel-compatibe inclines poten iidnetons
gage in anti-competitive conduct under section 2 of the Sherman Antitrust
Act when it withdrew access to its namespace extensions from independent
software vendors after first offering to share access.2 The court based its con=
clusion in lange part ona finding that no evidence had been presented to prove
fed i willing to sacrifice short-term profits or to irrationally

In both cases the issue is whether a single firm acting unilaterally violated
‘he relevant competition law provision. The EU decision rested on the con—
cept of abuse of power. The EU Commision said that Google used its power
to distort and interfere with competition to its own benefit. In the US case,
the court focused on the economic rationality of Miscrosofi's conduct pe)
concluded that the conduct was not irrational and therefore not a violation of |
‘the US law condemning “monopolizatio.” The differing perspectives play
important roles in the global competition law arena. Why are there such

* European Commission Decision (June 27, 2017) CASE AT. 3940 Google Se
(Shopping) aweenos pocapus ” on
Novell, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 731 F.3d 1064 (toh Cir, 2013)

Camano ern ie Mody P20, 0m
Ok 10.1093/esn/9780198727477.001,0001 VPs 20 COW Co


na

66 

major differences between competition laws? History? Polis? Ideology?
Characteristic of the national economy, particularly in relation to global
markets? All ofthe above? Single-firm conducts generally considered to be
‘especially dificult to analyze in competition law, We wll see why.

‘The above examples feature the conduct of a single firm acting
unilaterally —that is, by itself Ifa firm has sufficient influence or
“power” on a market, it can exclude rivals or limit their capacity
co compete and thereby significantly harm competition. Here the
harm does not result from a specific agreement (as in Ch. 5) but
from the conduct of a single firm. Most competition law statutes
tanger this type of conduct, but there ate important variations in
actual treatment, and virtually all systems struggle to respond to
it effectively. :
“This component of competition law is often controversial
and politically sensitive. It typically involves large firms, many
of which are also politically influential. Their power—whether
imagined or not—often elicits fear, resentment, and envy, and this
fuels efforts to use competition law to combat their threats. The
area symbolizes and crystalizes the conflict between the public in-
terest and private economic power, and it touches on major so-
cial and political issues such as inequality, political freedom, and
democracy. ;
Globalization adds a farther dimension to the tension.
Dominant firms are typically based in high income countries
(often the US or Europe) but the harm is often related to firms and
consumers in poorer and weaker countries. As financial resources
have become increasingly concentrated and large firms have ex-
panded their influence on geographical and digital markets, the
governments in poorer countries have sought ways to limit the
potential harms.

A. POWER AS THE
STARTING POINT

Analysis of unilateral conduct starts from the premise that a dom-
inant firm's influence on a market makes certain kinds of conduct

 67

harmful even though the same conduct by a firm without such
power may be harmless. For example, if a firm with a 1 percent
arket share sells below its cost of production, the price reduc-
tion is probably not a competition law issue, because it cannot
influence the rest of the market. If, on the other hand, a firm with
an 8s percent market share engages in the same conduct, the con-
duct may drive competitors from the market or dissuade other
firms from entering it.

‘Where a firm has a large enough share of the market to in-
fluence by itself how the market functions, it is considered
“dominant” and/or said to have “monopoly power.” It is this
power that allows it to act in ways that a firm that is subject to
competition could not act (at least not without losing money).
Crucially, chis power relates to a specific market, so competition
laws must identify or “define” the relevant market in order to
assess power.

B. DEFINING THE MARKET

Market definition i the basis for assessing a firm’s power. It is cen-

tral to the analysis of unilateral conduct, so itis often a battle-
ground in which plaintiff seek narrow definitions and defendants
seek the opposite. The broader the market, the smaller the influ-
ence of any firm’s individual market share. For example, a pro-
ducer of men’s dress shoes may have a large enough market share
to create dominance in the market for men’s dress shoes, but ifthe
market is defined to include all shoes, its share of the market may
be too stnall for it to have influence.

The goal of market definition is to identify the firms that
are competing with each other. A market may be defined by
geography—for example, are two stores ten miles apart competing
for the same customers? If yes, they are considered part of the
same geographical market. It may also be defined in relation to
a product or service—is product A competing with product B
for the same customers? If so, they are part of the same product
market, In some cases, the competitive relationship may be based
on a product's use—are firms competing to be used fora particular
purpose?


TTT ——————————z,

68 

‘There is no fixed formula for defining a market, but the basic
idea is that firms are competing where the market conduct of one
influences what its competitors can do. Competition laws use
‘various indicators to assess the scope of the relevant market. One
asks what happens to the demand for product A if product B’s
price changes. If B's price changes and there is no change in de-
mand for product A, the two firms are probably not competing,
because potential buyers of product B are not switching to
product A. If, on the other hand, demand for product A increases
when B’s price increases, this is evidence that consumers are
responding to B's price increase by switching to product A, so
they are in the same market. It isnot quite so simple, but for out
purposes this suffices.

‘Three basic methods are used to measure this sensitivity. One
is to conduct market surveys which ask consumers, for example,
“Would you switch from product A to product B if A were to in-
crease in price by a given percentage.” A second is to analyze past
pattems in similar situations to predict what is likely to happen in
the future, The third is to use economic modeling to identify the
probable incentives of consumers. Bach method involves a different
set of costs, and this can influence the choices institutions make in
using them, Each method is imperfect, so two or more may be used
rogether in defining the market. Where the conduct has already
‘occurred, this data is usually seen as reasonably dependable. Where
the issue is the future effect of the conduct, as in merger analysis
(Ch. 1) the data is considered less reliable, because markets evolve,
‘often rapidly, and past responses become less useful in predicting
farure ones.

Market definition is notoriously frustrating. Many lawyers,
administrators, and judges complain that it is uncertain and
often seems arbitrary. The methods used are necessarily impte~
cise, because many factors can influence consumer behavior and
because it is dificult to predict how a particular decision-maker
‘will define a market, Experienced practitioners often study the
factors that a particular Competition Authority (CA) or court
has considered important in the very recent past as a basis for
predicting what it will do in the future.

.

 69

C. DOMINANCE AND
MONOPOLY POWER

Market share is generally used as the primary indicator of power.
This generally refers to the percentage that a supplier’ sales have
of the total sales on the market, Laws vary as to how much market
share constitutes dominance in various contexts, Some regimes
(eg, South Africa) specify the marker share percentage that is
deemed to constitute dominance. Others assess the necessary
market share more flexibly. Some may require 60 percent; others
‘may find it at much lower levels. Much depends on the market's
structure—that is, how the market shares of other participants are
arrayed. For example, in a highly concentrated market in which
each of three firms has a 30 percent market share, competition
between the three may be intense—no firm has power over price.
In contrast, a 30 percent marker share may be enough to control
a marker in which no other firm has more than a 2 percent share.
Some CAs provide guidelines that explain how they assess dom-
‘nance. Some (e.g., India) require that the social obligations and
costs of the firm be taken into account in assessing dominance.

D. THE MOST
COMMON CONDUCT
STANDARD: EXCLUSION

Possessing power is rarely seen as a competition law violation;
some form of conduct is also required. As we know, a regime's
goals shape its conduct standards. Where economic goals are
central, the focus is usually on whether the conduct is “exclu-
soma” Where political and social goals are considered, issues
such as economic freedom and ef 1 equali
ek Sop fects on income equality are
Exclusionary conduct exists where a dominant firm excludes
4 competitor from a market or impedes its capacity to compete
ffectively—for example, by using its power to interfere with a
rival's supply arrangements and thereby increasing its costs and


a

70 

reducing its capacity to compete. Economic analysis is used to
assess whether the conduct has led to an increase in price over
‘a competitive price or had another similar impact on market
competition. Types of exclusionary conduct include: predatory
pricing, unilateral boycots, refusal to deal, bundling or tying of
products, and others.

‘The example of predatory pricing illustrates some of the is-
sues involved. If a dominant firm reduces its prices below its
cost of production in order to drive competitors out of the
market, reduce their incentive or capacity to compete, or deter
potential new entrants from entering the marker, it may reduce
competition. This is predatory pricing and violates most com-
petition laws. The underlying assumption is that a dominant
firm has a strong enough market position to take short-term
losses in order to achieve long-term anticompetitive gains, so
this conduct may be rational from the firm’s standpoint and ef-
fective as a competitive strategy. A weaker firm cannot effec~
tively use the strategy, because if it reduces prices below cost,
it will merely lose money! Systems differ in the measure of cost
that is used to assess predation (some use average variable cost,
cgi while others use average total cost) In some systems addi-
tional concepts are used in the analysis. For example, in the US,
the courts have generally accepted the idea that there must also
be a rational expectation that the dominant firm can recoup its
losses.

‘A central issue in the treatment of unilateral conduct from
any perspective is that potentially anticompetitive conduct is
embedded in and interwoven with other elements of a firm's
overall business plan. This makes it difficult to isolate che harmful
conduct with confidence and, especially, to assess damage
resulting from it, Moreover, conduct that is permitted under
competition law when a firm does not have monopoly power can
become a violation as the firm acquires a dominant position, s0

there may be no clear beginning or ending of the harmful con-
duct. Microsoft, for example, started by giving away its software.
‘As long as they did not have monopoly power, this was not an
antitrust problem, but it became a potential violation when the
firm did acquire monopoly power.

 n

E. SAME CONDUCT
DIFFERENT NAMES

In the US and a few other countries, the term “monopoliza-
tion” is used to describe harmful dominant firm conduct, while
in Europe and clsewhere itis usually referred to as “abuse of a
dominant position.” This sometimes leads to confusion and un-
certainty, but just be aware that the two labels refer to the same
category of conduct—anticompetitive conduct by a single frm.

__ Monopolization: Section 2 of the US Sherman Act prohibits

‘monopolization” (see Ch. 8). The basic idea is that a single
firm with monopoly power “monopolizes” when it excludes or
hinders competitors or potential competitors in order to acquire
control of a market or increase its control of a market, but a cen-
tury or so of judicial opinions interpreting the term has produced
little clarity beyond that. This may be one reason why few other
systems have chosen to use the concept,

Abuse of a dominant position: Most jurisdictions use this
standard ro assess unilateral conduct, Iti clearer than “monopoli-
zation” in that it specifies (r) that it applies only to dominant firms
and (2) only to conduct that constitutes “abuse of dominance.”
Where it is used, courts and CAs have often been able to achieve
at least a degree of clarity about how to use it.

F, A LESS COMMON CONDUCT
STANDARD: EXPLOITING
CONSUMERS

A. second type of abuse involves “exploiting” consume

Although tanr jadsbeases idde 6 coe inealig the US,
do not. This refers to conduct in which a firm's dominance allows
it to extract more from consumers than competition would
allow, typically by raising its price above a competitive price. Its
dominance is here used to “exploit” consumers. The concept was
first used in German competition law during the early twentieth

century, but it is now widespread in Europe, Latin America, and
elsewhere. ,


ee

p 

‘The concept of exploitation abuse is often seen as politically
attractive. The prospect of using competition law to reduce prices
is often a source of political support, particularly where inflation
is a major concern, It also directly addresses the threat of dom-
inant firm power and sharply symbolizes the conflict between
powerful firms and those subject to that power.

‘Yet many competition officials encounter two main obstacles
that make it less attractive to apply. First, it calls for proof that
the price exceeds a competitive price, but determining what the
competitive price is or would be is necessarily speculative and
therefore difficult to defend. Second, there is no clear and con-
sistent way of deciding how much higher a firm’s price must be
in order to constitute abuse—2 percent? 5 percent? There have
been many efforts to identify such principles, but few, if any,
have been found widely convincing. As a result, this form of
abuse is often criticized, especially in the US, as inherently dis-
cretionary and another name for price regulation, Where CAs
‘or courts apply rigorous legal standards, this form of abuse is
seldom enforced, because it is so hard to prove, although CAs
sometimes use it as a threat to induce large firms (e.g. service
station owners in Europe) to reduce their prices. This has become
a big issue inthe debates about competition law and Big Data (ee

Ch. 12).

G. PURSUING
UNILATERAL CONDUCT

‘The uncertainties in this area make decisions to pursue unilat-
eral conduct risky and sometimes very expensive. As a result,
public enforcement is typically limited, and private enforcement
rare. Fines are usually the only tools available, but, assessing the
amount of such fines tends to be highly uncertain. Criminal
penalties are not used because holding a firm to an uncertain
standard would be unfair (and in some systems unconstitutional).
“Where a reviewing court requires adequate proof of harm before
approving a CA's decision, the CA's efforts are particularly vel-
netable to reversal. This risk is lower where review is less strict.
Political issues must also be considered. The lack of a clear basis


before a decision opens a CA to the criticism that it based its decision

on factors such as corruption or political influence. The fact that
such cases often involve large, well-known firms with political
leverage increases this concern and invites interference from the
executive branch,

Deterrence potential is also difficult to estimate, Fitms that
dominate a market are typically large, and many are also well
known—for example, Google. A CA that takes action against
such a firm can be assured of publicity. This may deter other firms
from considering similar conduct, but it may also draw unwanted
attention to the CA and subject it to attacks. The CA's calculation
isa diffcule one.

H. ECONOMIC DEPENDENCE AND.
RELATIVE MARKET POWER

Firms that do not dominate a market may nevertheless have
power over their suppliers or distributors, ‘This has led some
legislatures to create a distinct set of principles to deal with harm
from the abuse of relative market power. Here harm results not
from the to of eats ona market, but from its effects on
one or more firms that are economically dependent on a pow-
erful firm, The basic idea is that a fim may | be able to impose
conditions on dependent firms that impede their apy to
compete and thereby reduce competition. It is often also seen
as simply unfair. Such legislation often gives dependent firms
(usually suppliers of the dominant firm) a legal basis for claiming
compensation for such harms from the firm that causes the harm,

‘The idea was frst discussed in the context of German competi-
tion tee development, and ithas spread to tome other countries,

mainly in Latin Americ las sia * ¢
f= ama pa “a and East Asia (e.g., Japan). It is not part

> Tewasindaded Germany’

cman Act Agana Rstrnt of Competition ch. 22
Law of uly 27,957, asamended 1965, 197, 1976, 98,195,958 pear
2017; Japan’s Act on Prohibition of Private Monopoliation and Maintenance of
Fir Tad (only enaced a Act No.5 of Apr 41947),


4 

I. GLOBAL PATTERNS
AND DYNAMICS

Erom a global perspective, the treatment of dominant firm con-
duct divides along several lines. One is more formal than actual—
the line between states that use the concept of monopolization
‘and those that use the abuse of dominance concepts. As noted
above, this may make little difference in outcomes, but itis im-
portant to recognize that the two concepts relate to the same type
Of conduct and that the languages and logics used often differ
significantly.

"A second divide is far more significant. In systems that rely
primarily or exclusively on economic analysis of effects, enforce-
‘ment tends to be limited by the difficulty of proving the effects
and by the uncertainty and cost of trying. Where political and
social goals are also considered, however, enforcement sometimes
proceeds without a firm or predictable legal base.

Finally, the interests of states in this area of competition law
diverge significantly. Capital-exporting countries that are home
to powerful companies often pay limited attention to unilateral
conduct. Capital-importing countries (many of which are less ec-
‘onomieally robust) may have stronger incentives to pursue such.
conduct. In many countries, political support for competition
law focuses on the conduct of powerful firms, and often the dom-
{nant firms are not domestic, but foreign.

7
MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

In General Electric/Honeywell v, European Commission (2001), the
Commision blocked a. proposed merger between two aa is us
corporations — General Electric 2000 Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned
subsidiary of General Electric (GE), and Honeywell, Inc., which would
Ihave resulted in Honeywell becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of GE. Ie
‘was probably the largest merger in history. The US competition authorities
approved the merger. The European Commision blacked it. Afr extensive
investigation of the local, regional, and global markets in which the parties
‘operated, the Commission concluded that GE had a dominant position in
several markets for various aircraft engines as well as having significant fix
nancial influence in these and other markets. Honeywell, it found, had sig-
nificant advantages in several product markets because it could provdea range
of products that could not be matched by any other competitors. According to
the Commision, the meger would “bring about anti-competitive ets a
«result of horizontal overlaps and the vertical and conglomerate integration
ofthe merging partes activities.” Specifically, the horizontal overlap would
amount 04100 percent market share for the merged entity in some market
sed wl eo an anal end omer advantage”
over its competitors, it could then provide bundled and pac
_producs that no other entity anywhere ese in the world could, eee
‘Commission specifically noted how certain customers, thats, airlines, would
have no choice bu to buy certain products fom the merged entity. As a result,
they could expect lower profits, which in turn would rele in les investment
inresearch and development. Ultimately, these competitors would experience
market foreclosure and market exit, as they would be wnabl to compete with
the resulting merged entity. The fcus was on harm to European markets and
ther consumers}

In May 2019, the Australian competition authority (Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission —ACCC) pet & Pacific
‘Nationa, an Australian frm active ia transporting gods in a spc re~
_sion of Australia, had violated Australia's competition statue by acquiring a

+ Cimninon (Gut “COMP
‘Commission Decision [200] OJ (C331) 24. 7

Corstiavantnt Da ats Ova es
‘DOK: 10, 10839/0s0'9780198727477,001,0001 ARR SOS

